h1. Mongoid geo

h2. IMPORTANT: THIS IS A PRE-BETA BRANCH AS OF JUNE 10, NOT WORKING - BUT PLEASE CHIP IN TO HELP!

Also I just created a _1_0_beta_ branch of _geo_calc_ which supports changing the :coords_mode. Also not tested yet.

h3. Running specs

The goal of this branch is to define a good specs structure and build up a good design of this 'geo' add-on this way.

<pre>
$ bundle
$ bundle exec rspec spec/mongoid/geo/config_spec.rb  
</pre>

h3. Spec status: June 14, 2011

Specs are currently being reworked to align with the new simplified design.
- A Mongoid::Geo::Config object has been added which you use to configure Mongoid::Geo, see mongoid/geo/config_spec.rb
- GeoPoints and GeoVectors can be integrated using the new #enable_extensions! method on Mongoid::Geo::Config, specs in mongoid/geo/extensions demonstrate how to use this
- Creation of Mpongo query hashes for Twin- and NestedOperators have been extracted into Query classes (see mongoid/geo/queries folder)
- #geo_near now uses configuration from Mongoid::Geo::Config, such as the #distance_calculator (if Mongo server doesn't support this) and the #radians_multiplier etc.

h2. Example Usage 1.0.beta (goal)

<pre>
class Address
  field :location, :type => Array, :geo => true
end

my_home = Address.new :location => {:lat => 10, :lng => 12}.to_lng_lat
my_job = Address.new :location => [10.2, "12.1"].to_lng_lat
my_club = Address.new :location => [10.2, 12.1]
my_club.location_lat == 12.1 # true
my_club.location_lng == 10.2 # true

nearest_locations = Address.geo_near my_club
nearest_locations.first.

# find near point, max distance
Address.where :location.near_max => [{:latitude => 10, :longitude => 12 }, 5] # 5 km?
Address.where :location.near_max => [my_club, 5]

Address.where(:location.within_box => [my_job, my_club])
Address.where(:location.within_center(:sphere) => [my_home, 5])

# geo_point integration (using GeoPoint class)

Mongoid::Geo::Config.enable_extension! :geo_point

p1 = "58 38 38N, 003 04 12W".geo_point # DMS format support!
my_home = Address.new :location => p1.to_lng_lat

# a GeoPoint includes some nice geo calculation methods, that are calculated relative to itself !
p1.bearing_to my_club.geo_point # => 60 deg ?
p1.distance_to my_home.geo_point # => 2341 kms ?

# geo_vectors integration

Mongoid::Geo::Config.enable_extension! :geo_vectors

my_home = Address.new :location => p1.to_lng_lat
my_home.add [2, 4].vector # add lng/lat vector
my_home.add [20, 4.km].vector # add vector of 4km at 20 degrees

</pre>

h2. Example Usage 1.0 (goal)

# Here I would like some kind of location repository key/value storage and allow use/integration of unit distances (see gem 'geo_magic' fx)

<pre>
Address.where(:location.within_box => [:my_job, :my_club]) # each point should be looked up in the repo using the symbol as key  
Address.where :location.near_max => [:my_home, 5000.meters] # use geo_magic distance here!
</pre>

h2. Intro

This is a Geo extension for Mongoid 2.

"MongoDB Geospatial Indexing":http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Geospatial+Indexing

* Supports Mongo DB 1.7+ sphere distance calculations
* Extra geo calculation methods such as #near_sphere etc.
* Adds concept of a special "geo" field (for setting the location point)
* Configure and create geo indexes
* Calculate locations near a given point and return as criteria, sorted by distance

h2. Status Update (June 11, 2011) 

- Refactored and created a whole new spec infrastructure to adhere to the latest refactoring/structuring of the files in the gem etc.
- Note: Extracting logic into Shapes, Config etc. should facilitate unit testing!
- Added #distance_calculator Config attribute to set the Module to use for distance calculation  

h2. Status Update (June 10, 2011) 

Major refactoring trying to structure the code even better. 
- Created Shape classes (Box, Circle, Distance) to encapsulate the shape/array logic for Outer- and TwinOperators (geo criterions)
- Removed the point.rb file for now! (the goal is to substitute this using GeoPoint of geo_calc)
- OuterOperators and TwinOperators are very similar, now OuterOperators inherits from TwinOperators
- Added Mongoid::Geo::Config object with macro: Mongoid::Geo.config do |c| ...
- Added globals #coord_mode (:lat_lng, :lng_lat), #distance_formulas (:sphere, :flat) and #units (:kms, :miles) for Mongoid::Geo::Config object  
- Use autoload to lazy load files when needed

TODO:
- add #to_point functionality somehow using GeoPoint
- make sure GeoPoint supports modes :lng_lat and lat_lng
- debug/test to make sure all functionality still works

Haversine
- consider using 'haversine' gem (or extract) for haversine calculation, or use internal distance calculation of GeoPoint?
- See https://github.com/kristianmandrup/haversine
- consider extracting Unit class into _geo_calc_, which now has a _geo_units_ namespace. Maybe extract this into separate gem? 
- I think much of Unit is already part of Haversine in hversine gem!

- See the _alternative_alg_ branch, where I extracted the _Haversine_ from _mongoid_geo_ into. 

Alternatively there is the _geo_distance_ gem with multiple spherical distance calculations included.

<pre>
  require 'haversine'

  distance = Haversine.distance(35.61488, 139.5813, 48.85341, 2.3488)

  distance.class => Haversine::Distance
  distance.to_miles => 6032.71091869803
  distance.to_kilometers => 9715.47049115903
  distance.to_meters => 9715470.49115903
  distance.to_feet => 31852713.6507256  
</pre>

h2. Status Update (May 31, 2011)

Added support for using GeoPoint from "geo_calc":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/geo_calc to pass around location points. Also makes it easy to use GeoVectors from "geo_vectors":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/geo_vectors    

Please see new specs _use_geo_calc_ and _use_geo_vectors_ in the /spec folder to see how this is used. Please help make sure the functionality works in the right way!
Thanks :)

h2. Status Update (May 25, 2011)
* Fixed major bug which stored coordinate in [:lat, :lng]. This is incorrect. Coordinates must be stored with :lng as the first value in order for geospatial queries to work properly.
- Excerpt from MongoDB GeoSpatial Indexing
'The code assumes that you are using decimal degrees in (longitude, latitude) order. This is the same order used for the GeoJSON spec. 
Using (latitude, longitude) will result in very incorrect results, but is often the ordering used elsewhere, so it is good to double-check.  
The names you assign to a location object (if using an object and not an array) are completely ignored, only the ordering is detected.'

h2. Status update (May 21, 2011)

* Created alias methods such as _#near_sphere_ for _#nearSphere_ etc. to make the DSL much more 'rubyish'!
* Added #create_index! method (see 'Geo index' section below).

h2. You need help?

Post questions in the "mongoid-geo":http://groups.google.com/group/mongoid-geo group. Here I (and other uses of mongoid-geo) will 
try to help out and answer any questions. 

h2. Suggestions, improvements and bugs?

Please raise issues or suggestions for improvements in the "Issues" section on github. 
I would recommend that you try to branch the project, try to fix it yourself and make a pull request. 

h3. Current integrations

Mongoid geo has now been integrated with "Google-Maps-for-Rails":https://github.com/apneadiving/Google-Maps-for-Rails, thanks to "oli-g":https://github.com/oli-g, see "commit":https://github.com/oli-g/Google-Maps-for-Rails/commit/9ff5c82d33e3fa625e441baa516fee05e9ae979c

h2. Mongoid 2 geo features

The following summarized what geo functionality is already provided by Mongoid 2.0 (as far as I could tell, May 9th, 2011)

h3. Find addresses near a point

<pre>
  Address.near(:latlng => [37.761523, -122.423575, 1])
</pre>

h3. Find locations within a circle

<pre>
  base.where(:location.within => { "$center" => [ [ 50, -40 ], 1 ] })
</pre>

h3. Create geo-spatial index

<pre>
  class Person
    field :location, :type => Array
    index [[ :location, Mongo::GEO2D ]], :min => -180, :max => 180
  end

  # to ensure indexes are created, either:
  Mongoid.autocreate_indexes = true

  # or in the mongoid.yml
  autocreate_indexes: true
</pre>

These are the only geo features I could find that are currently built-in for Mongoid 2.

_Mongoid Geo_ implements some nice extra geo features:

h1. Mongoid Geo features

The following briefly demonstrates all the features that *mongoid-geo* provides:

h2. Geo index

A new _geo_index_ class method 

Usage example:

@geo_index :location@

Note: For embedded documents, you must define the index in the root collection class. (davemitchell)

Calling geo_index also adds a #create_index! method to the class to enable construction of the index (on the instances/data in the DB). 

<pre>
  class Address
    ...
    geo_index :location
  end
  
  Address.create_index!
</pre>

I also added a nice little Array macro so you can do this:

<pre>
  [Address, Location].create_geo_indexes!
</pre>

h2. Geo option for Array GPS location field

Objective: When setting a geo GPS location array, the setter should try to convert the value to an array of floats

The "old" manual way:

<pre>
  class Person
    field :locations, :type => Array

    def locations= args
      @locations = args.kind_of?(String) ? args.split(",").map(&:to_f) : args
    end
  end
</pre>

*mongoid-geo* provides a new @:geo@ option that can be used with any Array field:

Usage example:

<pre>
  class Person
    field :location, :type => Array, :geo => true

    geo_index :location
  end

   p = Person.new

   # A Geo array can now be set via String or Strings, Hash or Object, here a few examples...
   # Please see geo_fields_spec.rb for more options!

   p.location = "45.1, -3.4"
   p.location = "45.1", "-3.4"
   p.location = {:lat => 45.1, :lng => -3.4}
   p.location = [{:lat => 45.1, :lng => -3.4}]
   p.location = {:latitude => 45.1, :longitude => -3.4}  

   my_location  = Location.new :latitude => 45.1, :longitude => -3.4
   p.location   = my_location

   # for each of the above, the following holds
   assert([45.1, -3.4], p.location)

   # also by default adds #lat and #lng convenience methods (thanks to TeuF)
   assert(45.1 , p.lat)
   assert(-3.4 , p.lng)
</pre>

Customizing lat/lng attribute names:

<pre>
    # the #lat and #lng convenience methods can also be customized with the :lat and :lng options
   field :location, :type => Array, :geo => true, :lat => :latitude, :lng => :longitude

   assert(45.1 , p.latitude)
   assert(-3.4 , p.longitude)

   # or set the array attributes using symmetric setter convenience methods!
   p.latitude   = 44
   assert(44 , p.latitude)
</pre>

Reversing lat/lng for spherical calculations

<pre>
  # You can also reverse the lat/lng positioning of the array storage - this is fx useful for spherical calculations
  
  Mongoid::Geo.spherical_mode do
    # Mongoid::Geo.lat_index.should == 1
    # Mongoid::Geo.lng_index.should == 0
    address.location = "23.5, -47"
    address.location.should == [23.5, -47].reverse
  end  

  # or alternatively 
  Mongoid::Geo.spherical = true
  
  address.location = "23.5, -47"
  address.location.should == [23.5, -47].reverse  
</pre>

h2. geo_near

<pre>
class Address
  include Mongoid::Document
  extend Mongoid::Geo::Near

  field :location, :type => Array, :geo => true
  ...
end

# Find all addresses sorted nearest to a specific address loation
nearest_addresses = Address.geo_near(another_address, :location)

class Position
  include Mongoid::Document

  field :pos, :type => Array, :geo => true
  ...
end
</pre>

Find all positions sorted nearest to the address loation

@nearest_positions = Position.geo_near(another_address.location, :pos)@

Perform distance locations in Speherical mode inside Mongo DB (default is :plane)

@nearest_positions = Position.geo_near(another_address.location, :pos, :mode => :sphere)@

Other options supported are: @:num, :maxDistance, :distanceMultiplier, :query@

GeoNear returns each distance calculated in degrees. Use the :distanceMultiplier or :unit option to return in the unit of your choice (see unit.rb).

Set @:distanceMultiplier = 6371@ to get distance in KMs
Set @@:distanceMultiplier = @3963.19@ to get distance in Miles

You can also use the :unit option instead like this (supports :feet, :meters, :kms, :miles):

@results = Address.geo_near @center.location, :location, :unit => :feet, :dist_order => :desc@

The _geo_near_ query result is returned as a _Mongoid::Criteria_

@results.desc(:distance).map(&:distance)@

Note that the @:fromLocation@ field, stores the location the distance was last calculated as a Hash of the GPS location point it was calculated from:

@[23.5, -47].hash@ 

This hash can be retrieved (and used for comparison?) using the @fromHash@ field 

@from = results.first.fromHash@

You can also at any time get the GPS location point which the distance of any result instance was calculated from, using the @fromPoint field

@from = results.first.fromPoint@
</pre>

You can now explicitly set/configure the Mongo DB version used. This will affect whether built-in Mongo DB distance calculation will be used or using standalone Ruby Haversine algorithm. By default the Mongo DB version is set to 1.8 (as of May 9, 2011) . See _geo_near_ specs for more details/info on this.

@Mongoid::Geo.mongo_db_version = 1.7@

h2. Mongoid Geo extra inclusions

Find addresses near a point using spherical distance calculation

<pre>
  Address.near_sphere(:location => [ 72, -44 ])
</pre>

h2. Mongoid Geo extra inflections

h3. near_sphere

<pre>
  base.where(:location.near_sphere => [ 72, -44 ])
  # => :location => { "$nearSphere" : [ 72, -44 ] }
</pre>

h3. near_max

Find points near a given point within a maximum distance

<pre>
  base.where(:location.near_max => [[ 72, -44 ], 5])
  # => { $near: [50, 40] , $maxDistance: 3 }

  base.where(:location.near_max(:sphere) => [[ 72, -44 ], 5])
  # => { $nearSphere: [50, 40] , $maxDistanceSphere: 3 }

  base.where(:location.near_max(:sphere, :flat) => [[ 72, -44 ], 5])
  # => { $nearSphere: [50, 40] , $maxDistance: 3 }
</pre>

You can also use a Hash to define the near_max

<pre>
  places.where(:location.near_max => {:point => [ 72, -44 ], :distance => 5})
</pre>

Or use an Object (which must have the methods @#point@ and @#distance@ that return the point and max distance from that point)

<pre>
  near_max_ = (Struct.new :point, :distance).new
  near_max.point = [50, 40]
  near_max.distance = [30,55]

  places.where(:location.near_max => near_max)
</pre>

Note: For the points, you can also use a hash or an object with the methods/keys, either @:lat, :lng@ or @:latitude, :longitude@

Example:

<pre>
  center = (Struct.new :lat, :lng).new
  center.lat = 72
  center.lng = -44
  places.where(:location.within_center => [center, radius])

  # OR

  places.where(:location.within_center => [{:lat => 72, :lng => -44}, radius])
</pre>

h3. within_box

<pre>
  box = [[50, 40], [30,55]]
  base.where(:location.within_box => box)
  # => locations: {"$within" : {"$box" : [[50, 40], [30,55]]}

  base.where(:location.within_box(:sphere) => box)
  # => locations: {"$within" : {"$boxSphere" : [[50, 40], [30,55]]}
</pre>

You can also use a Hash to define the box

<pre>
  places.where(:location.within_box => {:lower_left => [50, 40], :upper_right => [30,55]})

  # or mix and match

  places.where(:location.within_box => {:lower_left => {:lat => 50, :lng => 40}, :upper_right => [30,55] } )
</pre>

Or use an object (which must have the methods @#lower_left@ and @#upper_right@ that return the points of the bounding box)

<pre>
  box = (Struct.new :lower_left, :upper_right).new
  box.lower_left =  [50, 40]
  box.upper_right = [30, 55]

  places.where(:location.within_box => box)
</pre>

h3. within_center

<pre>
  center = [50, 40]
  radius = 4

  places.where(:location.within_center => [center, radius])
  # => places: {"$within" : {"$center" : [[50, 40], 4]}

  places.where(:location.within_center(:sphere) => [center, radius])
  # => places: {"$within" : {"$centerSphere" : [[50, 40], 4]}
</pre>

You can also use a hash to define the circle, with @:center@ and @:radius@ keys

<pre>
  places.where(:location.within_center => {:center => [50, 40], :radius => 4})
</pre>
                                              
Or use an object (which must have the methods #center and #radius that return the center and radius of the circle))

<pre>
  circle = (Struct.new :center, :radius).new
  circle.center = [50, 40]
  circle.radius = 4

  places.where(:location.within_center => circle)
</pre>
               
h2. Note on the specs

The specs still use the old "Javascript" like method convention, such as _#nearSphere_ 
Don't let that fool you ;)

h2. Contribute

*Please feel free to contribute to the project!*

I aim to deliver a complete *geo* package for use with _Mongoid_. This gem should work nicely with "geo_calc":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/geo_calc and "geo_vectors":https://github.com/kristianmandrup/geo_vectors that I'm also working on.

_Your assistance on any of these projects will be greatly appreciated :)_
